[Music]
so picture this you're an apprentice
seaman on a Whaler and you're taking
your first ever voyage just as you're
sailing deeper into the ocean your ship
is attacked by a sperm whale and it
swallows you whole yeah but after two
days in its belly
you're finally rescued and found alive
now if that would have happened last
month everybody would be tweeting about
it and you'd probably be taking selfies
in the whale's stomach oh by the way
have you ever had any close encounters
with a whale let me know down in the
comments anyway the adventure went
somewhat differently about a hundred
thirty years ago it was in the middle of
February in 1891 James Bartley was just
21 years old and was ready to start his
training as a seaman on a Whaler he was
thrilled for his newfound career path
and prepared to ace it while on board
his first whaling ship called the star
of the East in the middle of the South
Atlantic Ocean they spotted a huge sperm
whale it was about half a mile away from
the ship and they were getting closer
the closer they got to the Beast the
larger it became the whale started to
sense the danger approaching as soon as
the ship got close enough its sails were
loosened and the small boats were
lowered into the sea then the unexpected
happened an unpredictable race started
between the immersed sperm whale and the
star of the East
James Bartley was in the first boat that
got close to the creature their plan was
to approach it from the back believing
that they'd catch it off-guard and be
able to attack so they crept up from the
rear they got so close they could almost
touch it but as soon as one of the
seamen harpoon the whale it started to
panic
it's immediate instinct was to free
itself and fight back the whale started
thrashing its giant tail on the water
causing massive waves that crashed
around the boats Bartley and his team
realized that they were in dangerous
waters and had to get out of there each
of them grabbed a paddle and started
rowing frantically to get out of its
reach but they were too close to the
flutes the giant kept thrashing its tail
overwhelming the oarsmen with large
foamy waves then a loud roar came out of
the whale's mouth
[Music]
it slapped the water with its large
flukes and took a deep dive under the
water the seamen were sure the whale
would come for them but they didn't know
where to paddle because they couldn't
see it not only was it too deep but the
foamy waves also made it impossible to
see under the water as the ocean began
to calm large ominous waves started to
appear it was now clear that the whale
was returning but from which direction
[Music]
the seaman had no other option but to
pick a path and begin frantically
paddling suddenly they felt a
splintering crash underneath the hull
which sent their boat spinning into the
air the whale broke the wooden long boat
into a million pieces and the five men
landed in the water another loud roar
was heard and the Beast disappeared
another long boat rushed to the rescue
and picked up all the men in the water
except one apprentice James Bartley they
looked for him for a few hours but he
was nowhere to be found they had no
choice but to return to the ship without
him
before long the whale reappeared this
time it was wallowing on the surface
without disturbing the large vessel as
the seamen were gazing at the creature
they noticed that it appeared slightly
swelled but they didn't pay much
attention to it many hours had passed
since that incident in the morning and
right before sunset the whale was still
floating on the surface of the water it
was clear now that it was no longer
alive it was just a few hundred feet
away from the ship and the crew members
decided to approach it once again they
got into their long boats and started
paddling towards it they hooked the
animal on a winch and brought it closer
to the ship since it was getting dark
they kept the whale attached to the ship
and decided to continue their job the
next day the following morning the first
thing the oarsmen did was to look again
for any sight of their missing friend
but they were only met with miles and
miles of water and the view of the
beautiful sunrise the men decided to
move on and continue their hunt for
another whale when suddenly something
strange happened that afternoon as
someone was investigating the bloated
whale they captured the night before he
noticed something moving in its stomach
at first the crewmen brushed it off he
thought he was just tired and seeing
things but then the second movement
happened
this time it was unmistakable something
large was alive and moving inside the
whale immediately he informed his fellow
sailors and they rushed to the scene
they were all staring at it not knowing
what the next step should be as soon as
the captain of the ship arrived he
alerted the ship's doctor everyone
thought that a huge fish was inside and
the doctor decided to perform an
incision right then and there to
everyone's surprise the missing sailor
James Bartley slid out everyone sheer he
was alive but the doctor didn't let the
crews celebrate for long since he needed
their help as soon as Bartley came out
he appeared extremely pale and he was
nearly unconscious he was blabbering
words that didn't make sense so the
doctor ordered everyone to drench him
with seawater and clean him up
immediately he couldn't speak and he was
taken into a confined cabin on board the
ship he wasn't allowed to leave the room
he was floundering and could have hurt
himself so everything he needed was
brought to him after a few weeks had
passed he was making steady progress
within a month he was able to talk to
his fellow sailors and share his
unbelievable experience he remembered
how he saw himself falling into the
water and as soon as he was submerged
he saw the ginormous mouth opening
Bartley was too small to swim away and
without even thinking he swam through a
slimy tube that took him to the whale
stomach he recalled how he was able to
breathe but after some time he blacked
out the young sailor couldn't remember
anything after that that was James
Bartley's first and last trip at sea due
to that extraordinary experience it was
said that his skin turned white and he
lost his sight for the rest of his life
the crew members of the ship started
sharing his story by word of mouth and
it began gaining momentum in 1896 the
first
article was published in the New York
world telling a small portion of the
story the readers of the newspaper were
intrigued by the story and began asking
for more details so they sent their
letters to the editor with their
questions a week later another article
came out from the same newspaper
responding to the queries of the readers
with more details of the story after
that a third article followed with a
similar incident depicting a man-eating
shark
a few more articles emerged around the
world narrating the event and continued
up until 1914 then everything went quiet
years later a historian picked up the
story and began an investigation his
name was Edward Davis he read the
stories that were published and noticed
a lot of factual inconsistencies while
the ship in the story the star of the
east was a British ship that did exist
at that time it wasn't a whaling vessel
after some more digging
he found that James Bartley's name
wasn't even on the crewmember list to
add to the doubt during his
investigation Davis received a letter
from the captain's wife which stated
that the whale story was a hoax she knew
because she had been traveling with her
husband during his sailing years and
nothing like that had ever happened and
there was another flaw in the story it
would be scientifically impossible for a
human being to survive inside a whale
stomach even if there swallowed whole
in June of 1891 there was in fact a true
story about a huge 30-foot coral stone
whale that attacked people near Great
Yarmouth in England Edward Davis
believed the man swallowing sperm whale
tail was inspired by that incident
according to some reports
James Bartley returned to England and
started working as a cobbler maybe a
blind cobbler who knows alas it was just
a whale of a tale and a hard one to
swallow at that hey if you learn
something new today then give the video
a like and share it with a friend and
here are some other videos I think
you'll enjoy just click to the left
right and stay on the bright side of
life
[Music]